Adding example projects (#151)
dfinity/examples: motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/README.md

# Minimalistic Dapp

> The example dapp shows how to build a very basic dapp with both backend and fronted, using Motoko for the backend functionality and plain HTML and JavaScript for the frontend. The dapp is a simple counter, which will increment a counter by clicking a button in the frontend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The example dapp shows how to build a very basic dapp with both backend and frontend, using Motoko for the backend functionality and plain HTML and JavaScript for the frontend. The dapp is a simple counter, which will increment a counter by clicking a button in the frontend.
```

![Counter Frontend](README_images/frontend.png)

## Introduction
The purpuse of this example dapp is to build a minimalistic dapp, based on the default dapp template, installed by DFX when creating a new project. The dapp is a simple website with a counter. Every time a button is pressed, a counter is incremented. 

This example covers:

- Create new canister smart contract using the SDK (DFX)
- Use the default project as a template as the starting point for the new project
- Add backend functions for a counter (count, get count and reset count)
- Implement backend functions in the frontend
- Deploy the canister smart contract locally
- Test backend with Candid UI and command line using DFX, and test frontend in browser 

## Installation
This example project can be cloned, installed and deployed locally, for learning and testing purposes. The instructions are based on running the example on either macOS or Linux, but when using WSL2 on Windows, the instructions will be the same.

### Prerequisites

> The example project requeres the following installed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The example project requires the following installed:
```

> - GitHub

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- git
```

- Node.js
- DFX

> GitHub and Node can be installed from various package managers. DFX can be installed following the instructions [here](https://smartcontracts.org/docs/quickstart/local-quickstart.html#download-and-install).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
git and Node can be installed from various package managers. DFX can be installed following the instructions [here](https://smartcontracts.org/docs/quickstart/local-quickstart.html#download-and-install).
```

> - GitHub
> - Node.js
> - DFX 
> 
> GitHub and Node can be installed from various package managers. DFX can be installed following the instructions [here](https://smartcontracts.org/docs/quickstart/local-quickstart.html#download-and-install).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- git
- Node.js
- DFX 

Git and Node can be installed from various package managers. DFX can be installed following the instructions [here](https://smartcontracts.org/docs/quickstart/local-quickstart.html#download-and-install).
```
I think you mean git, not GitHub. Do we capitalize dfx?

### Install
Install the example dapp project:

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/dfinity/examples
$ cd motoko/minimal-dapp
$ npm install
```

The project folder will then look like this:

![Counter Frontend](README_images/project_files.png)

## Documentation
The three main parts of the example dapp is the backend, the Candid interface and the frontend. This example project is based on the default project, which is created when running the `dfx new project_name`, but most of the default project code is replaced to create the counter functionality in this project.

### Motoko backend
The backend functions are located in the `src/minimal_dapp/main.mo` Motoko file. The backend stores the counter value, and has functions to get, increment and reset the counter value.

#### Counter variable

> Three functions are created to make the counter work: count(), getCount() and reset(). The current counter value is stored as a number in the actor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Three functions are created to make the counter work: `count()`, `getCount()` and `reset()`. The current counter value is stored as a number in the actor.
```

```javascript
actor {
    var counter : Nat = 0;
}
```

#### count()

> The `count()` function increments the counter variable. This function is envoked when the user is clicking the button on the frontend, or when the function is called through the Candid interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `count()` function increments the counter variable. This function is invoked when the user clicks the button on the frontend, or when the function is called through the Candid interface.
```

```javascript
public func count() : async Nat {
    counter += 1;
    return counter;
};
```

> The function is returning the incremented counter variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function returns the incremented counter variable.
```

#### getCount()
The `getCount()` function returns the current counter value.

```javascript
public query func getCount() : async Nat {
    return counter;
};
```

#### reset()
The `reset()` function resets the counter value to 0 and returns the value.

```javascript
public func reset() : async Nat {
    counter := 0;
    return counter;
};
```

### Candid interface

> The Candid interface is automatically created, and it has a convienient UI, which provides an easy, user friendly way to test the backend. The UI is also automatically generated, and the canister ID can be found in the `canister_ids.json` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Candid interface is automatically created, and it has a convenient UI, which provides an easy, user-friendly way to test the backend. The UI is also automatically generated, and the canister ID can be found in the `canister_ids.json` file.
```

The localhost version of the `canister_ids.json` file can be found in `.dfx/local/canister_ids.json` and the URL is:

**http://<candid_canister_id>.localhost:8000/?id=<backend_canister_id>**

> 

Reviewer: Would you please update this to use `dfx canister id` to obtain the canister ids, rather than directly from the json files?

### Frontend
The default project installed with `dfx new project_name` has an `index.html` file with page HTML and an `index.js` file with an implementation of the backend functions. These two files are modified in this example project to support the counter functionality, and the backend functions.

#### HTML
All HTML code is in the `src/minimal_dapp/_assets/index.html` file, and most of the HTML is carried over from the default project. The button is kept and so is the section showing the result, just simplified.

```html
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">
    <head>
        <meta charset="UTF-8">
        <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width">
        <title>Minimal Dapp</title>
        <base href="/">

        <link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="main.css" />
    </head>
    <body>
        <img src="logo.png" alt="DFINITY logo" />
        <section>
            <button id="clickMeBtn">Click Me!</button>
        </section>
        <section id="counter"></section>
    </body>
</html>
```

#### Javascript

> Two eventlisteners are added to the JavaScript file, `src/minimal_dapp/_assets/index.js`, the existing JavaScript file from the default project. One eventlistener is for detecting button clicks, and it's calling the `count()` function in the backend, and an eventlistener for page load is added to get the initial value of the counter with `getCount()`. The backend functions are imported through the Candid interface.

Reviewer: The path for index.js seems to be incorrect

```bash
$ dfx deploy
```

## Testing
The functionality of this example dapp can be tested both in the frontend and in the backend. Before the example dapp can be tested, it must be deployed (locally) like described in the above Deployment section. 

### Test the Frontend
The URL for the frontend is depending on the canister ID, the local canister IDs can be found in `.dfx/local/canister_ids.json`. When deployed, the URL will look like this:

**https://<ui_canister_id>.localhost:8000**

### Test the backend
There are two ways of testing the backend. One way is by making command line requests using DFX, and the other way is to use the Candid UI.

#### DFX
DFX has a subset of commands for canister operations, and one of them enables calling the public functions added to the `main.mo` file in the previous step. In the following examples the initial value is 0. `count` will increment value and return 1, `getCount` will return the current value and `reset` will set the value to 0.

Command usage: `dfx canister call &#60project&#62  &#60function&#62`

```bash
$ dfx canister call minimal_dapp count
(1 : Nat)
```

```bash

> $ dfx canister call minimal_dapp getCount

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$ dfx canister call minimal_dapp getCount
```
I don't know if this is still the case, but in the past you had to add `--query` to get the faster call semantics. Otherwise I think the query is executed as a slower ingress message, with consensus (but no lasting state change). I maybe be wrong though.

Author: I think I'll leave it out for simplicity, but you have a good point.

Reviewer: `dfx canister call` now by default makes a query call for queries, or an update call for updates.

```
$ time dfx canister call minimal_dapp count   
(9 : nat)
dfx canister call minimal_dapp count  0.04s user 0.01s system 3% cpu 1.502 total
$ time dfx canister call minimal_dapp count
(10 : nat)
dfx canister call minimal_dapp count  0.04s user 0.01s system 3% cpu 1.534 total
$ time dfx canister call minimal_dapp getCount
(10 : nat)
dfx canister call minimal_dapp getCount  0.01s user 0.01s system 59% cpu 0.038 total
$ time dfx canister call minimal_dapp getCount
(10 : nat)
dfx canister call minimal_dapp getCount  0.01s user 0.01s system 63% cpu 0.037 total
```

(1 : Nat)
```

```bash
$ dfx canister call minimal_dapp reset
(0 : Nat)
```

#### Candid UI
The Candid UI provides an easy, user friendly interface for testing the backend. The UI is automatically generated, and the canister ID can be found in the `canister_ids.json` file.

The localhost version of the `canister_ids.json` file can be found in `.dfx/local/canister_ids.json` and the URL is:

> **http://<candid_canister_id>.localhost:8000/?id=<backend_canister_id>**

Reviewer: Please use `dfx canister id`

> **http://<candid_canister_id>.localhost:8000/?id=<backend_canister_id>**

Reviewer: Let's use `dfx canister id` to get the ids of these canisters.  These would be the commands given the current name of the canister.
```
$ dfx canister id __Candid_UI
$ dfx canister id hack
```

Reviewer 2: (there are examples of this in some of the other readme's)

# Minimalistic Dapp
The example dapp shows how to build a very basic dapp with both backend and fronted, using Motoko for the backend functionality and plain HTML and JavaScript for the frontend. The dapp is a simple counter, which will increment a counter by clicking a button in the frontend. 

![Counter Frontend](README_images/frontend.png)

## Introduction

> The purpuse of this example dapp is to build a minimalistic dapp, based on the default dapp template, installed by DFX when creating a new project. The dapp is a simple website with a counter. Every time a button is pressed, a counter is incremented. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of this example dapp is to build a minimalistic dapp, based on the default dapp template, installed by DFX when creating a new project. The dapp is a simple website with a counter. Every time a button is pressed, a counter is incremented. 
```

- Use the default project as a template as the starting point for the new project
- Add backend functions for a counter (count, get count and reset count)
- Implement backend functions in the frontend
- Deploy the canister smart contract locally
- Test backend with Candid UI and command line using DFX, and test frontend in browser 

## Installation
This example project can be cloned, installed and deployed locally, for learning and testing purposes. The instructions are based on running the example on either macOS or Linux, but when using WSL2 on Windows, the instructions will be the same.

### Prerequisites
The example project requires the following installed:

- git
- Node.js
- DFX 

Git and Node can be installed from various package managers. DFX can be installed following the instructions [here](https://smartcontracts.org/docs/quickstart/local-quickstart.html#download-and-install).

### Install
Install the example dapp project:

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/dfinity/examples
$ cd motoko/minimal-dapp
$ npm install
```

The project folder will then look like this:

![Counter Frontend](README_images/project_files.png)

## Documentation

> The three main parts of the example dapp is the backend, the Candid interface and the frontend. This example project is based on the default project, which is created when running the `dfx new project_name`, but most of the default project code is replaced to create the counter functionality in this project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The three main parts of the example dapp are the backend, the Candid interface and the frontend. This example project is based on the default project, which is created when running the `dfx new project_name` command, but most of the default project code is replaced to create the counter functionality in this project.
```

### Motoko backend
The backend functions are located in the `src/minimal_dapp/main.mo` Motoko file. The backend stores the counter value, and has functions to get, increment and reset the counter value.

#### Counter variable
Three functions are created to make the counter work: `count()`, `getCount()` and `reset()`. The current counter value is stored as a number in the actor.

```javascript
actor {
    var counter : Nat = 0;
}
```

#### count()
The `count()` function increments the counter variable. This function is invoked when the user clicks the button on the frontend, or when the function is called through the Candid interface.

```javascript
public func count() : async Nat {
    counter += 1;
    return counter;
};
```

The function returns the incremented counter variable.

#### getCount()
The `getCount()` function returns the current counter value.

```javascript
public query func getCount() : async Nat {
    return counter;
};
```

#### reset()
The `reset()` function resets the counter value to 0 and returns the value.

```javascript
public func reset() : async Nat {
    counter := 0;
    return counter;
};
```

### Candid interface

> The Candid interface is automatically created, and it has a convienient UI, which provides an easy, user friendly way to test the backend. The UI is also automatically generated, and the canister ID can be found in the `canister_ids.json` file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Candid interface is automatically created, and it has a convenient UI, which provides an easy, user friendly way to test the backend. The UI is also automatically generated, and the canister ID can be found in the `canister_ids.json` file. 
```

The localhost version of the `canister_ids.json` file can be found in `.dfx/local/canister_ids.json` and the URL is: 

> **http://<candid_canister_id>.localhost:8000/?id=<backend_canister_id>**

Reviewer: Same thing here about using `dfx canister id <canister name>` or `dfx canister --network ic id <canister name>` to get canister IDs.

    </body>
</html>
```

#### Javascript
Two eventlisteners are added to the JavaScript file, `src/minimal_dapp/_assets/index.js`, the existing JavaScript file from the default project. One eventlistener is for detecting button clicks, and it's calling the `count()` function in the backend, and an eventlistener for page load is added to get the initial value of the counter with `getCount()`. The backend functions are imported through the Candid interface.

```javascript
import { minimaldapp } from "../../declarations/minimal_dapp";

document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', async function () {
  const counter = await minimaldapp.getCount();
  document.getElementById("counter").innerText = "Counter: " + counter;
})

document.getElementById("clickMeBtn").addEventListener("click", async () => {
  const counter = await minimaldapp.count();
  document.getElementById("counter").innerText = "Counter: " + counter;
});
```

## Deployment
The local network is started by running this command:

```bash
$ dfx start --background
```

When the local network is up and running, run this command to deploy the canisters:

```bash
$ dfx deploy
```

## Testing

> The functionality of this example dapp can be tested both in the frontend and in the backend. Before the example dapp can be tested, it must be deployed (locally) like described in the above Deployment section. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The functionality in this example dapp can be tested both in the frontend and in the backend. Before the example dapp can be tested, it must be deployed (locally) as described in the above Deployment section. 
```

### Test the Frontend

> The URL for the frontend is depending on the canister ID, the local canister IDs can be found in `.dfx/local/canister_ids.json`. When deployed, the URL will look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The URL for the frontend depends on the canister ID. the local canister IDs can be found in `.dfx/local/canister_ids.json`. When deployed, the URL will look like this:
```

```javascript
actor {
    var counter : Nat = 0;
}
```

#### count()
The `count()` function increments the counter variable. This function is invoked when the user clicks the button on the frontend, or when the function is called through the Candid interface.

```javascript
public func count() : async Nat {
    counter += 1;
    return counter;
};
```

The function returns the incremented counter variable.

#### getCount()
The `getCount()` function returns the current counter value.

```javascript
public query func getCount() : async Nat {
    return counter;
};
```

#### reset()
The `reset()` function resets the counter value to 0 and returns the value.

```javascript
public func reset() : async Nat {
    counter := 0;
    return counter;
};
```

### Candid interface
The Candid interface is automatically created, and it has a convenient UI, which provides an easy, user-friendly way to test the backend. The UI is also automatically generated, and the canister ID can be retrieved from the `dfx canister id <canister_name>` command.

```bash
$ dfx canister id __Candid_UI
r7inp-6aaaa-aaaaa-aaabq-cai
```

> **http://<candid_canister_id>.localhost:8000/?id=<backend_canister_id>**

Reviewer: Following this readme from the beginning, the canister hasn't been created yet, so `dfx canister id` fails.  Can we move this section to follow the **Testing** section?

Otherwise the reader will see this:
```
Cannot find canister id. Please issue 'dfx canister create __Candid_UI'.
```

        </section>
        <section id="counter"></section>
    </body>
</html>
```

#### Javascript
Two eventlisteners are added to the JavaScript file, `src/minimal_dapp_assets/src/index.js`, the existing JavaScript file from the default project. One eventlistener is for detecting button clicks, and it's calling the `count()` function in the backend, and an eventlistener for page load is added to get the initial value of the counter with `getCount()`. The backend functions are imported through the Candid interface.

```javascript
import { minimaldapp } from "../../declarations/minimal_dapp";

document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', async function () {
  const counter = await minimaldapp.getCount();
  document.getElementById("counter").innerText = "Counter: " + counter;
})

document.getElementById("clickMeBtn").addEventListener("click", async () => {
  const counter = await minimaldapp.count();
  document.getElementById("counter").innerText = "Counter: " + counter;
});
```

## Deployment
The local network is started by running this command:

```bash
$ dfx start --background
```

When the local network is up and running, run this command to deploy the canisters:

```bash

> $ dfx deploy

Reviewer: This is the error I got at this point when following this example:

```
dfx deploy
Creating a wallet canister on the local network.
The wallet canister on the "local" network for user "default" is "rwlgt-iiaaa-aaaaa-aaaaa-cai"
Deploying all canisters.
Creating canisters...
Creating canister "minimal_dapp"...
"minimal_dapp" canister created with canister id: "rrkah-fqaaa-aaaaa-aaaaq-cai"
Creating canister "minimal_dapp_assets"...
"minimal_dapp_assets" canister created with canister id: "ryjl3-tyaaa-aaaaa-aaaba-cai"
Building canisters...
Building frontend...
The post-build step failed for canister 'ryjl3-tyaaa-aaaaa-aaaba-cai' with an embedded error: The command '"npm" "run" "build"' failed with exit status 'exit status: 1'.
Stdout:

> minimal_dapp_assets@0.1.0 prebuild
> npm run copy:types

> minimal_dapp_assets@0.1.0 copy:types
> rsync -avr .dfx/$(echo ${DFX_NETWORK:-'**'})/canisters/** --exclude='assets/' --exclude='idl/' --exclude='*.wasm' --delete src/declarations

building file list ... done
created directory src/declarations
minimal_dapp/
minimal_dapp/index.js
minimal_dapp/minimal_dapp.did
minimal_dapp/minimal_dapp.did.d.ts
minimal_dapp/minimal_dapp.did.js
minimal_dapp_assets/
minimal_dapp_assets/assetstorage.did
minimal_dapp_assets/index.js
minimal_dapp_assets/minimal_dapp_assets.did
minimal_dapp_assets/minimal_dapp_assets.did.d.ts
minimal_dapp_assets/minimal_dapp_assets.did.js

sent 20169 bytes  received 230 bytes  40798.00 bytes/sec
total size is 19415  speedup is 0.95

> minimal_dapp_assets@0.1.0 build
> webpack

assets by status 0 bytes [cached] 1 asset

WARNING in configuration
The 'mode' option has not been set, webpack will fallback to 'production' for this value.
Set 'mode' option to 'development' or 'production' to enable defaults for each environment.
You can also set it to 'none' to disable any default behavior. Learn more: https://webpack.js.org/configuration/mode/

ERROR in main
Module not found: Error: Can't resolve './src' in '/Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp'
resolve './src' in '/Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp'
  using description file: /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/package.json (relative path: .)
    Field 'browser' doesn't contain a valid alias configuration
    using description file: /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/package.json (relative path: ./src)
      no extension
        Field 'browser' doesn't contain a valid alias configuration
        /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/src is not a file
      .js
        Field 'browser' doesn't contain a valid alias configuration
        /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/src.js doesn't exist
      .json
        Field 'browser' doesn't contain a valid alias configuration
        /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/src.json doesn't exist
      .wasm
        Field 'browser' doesn't contain a valid alias configuration
        /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/src.wasm doesn't exist
      as directory
        existing directory /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/src
          using description file: /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/package.json (relative path: ./src)
            using path: /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/src/index
              using description file: /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/package.json (relative path: ./src/index)
                no extension
                  Field 'browser' doesn't contain a valid alias configuration
                  /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/src/index doesn't exist
                .js
                  Field 'browser' doesn't contain a valid alias configuration
                  /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/src/index.js doesn't exist
                .json
                  Field 'browser' doesn't contain a valid alias configuration
                  /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/src/index.json doesn't exist
                .wasm
                  Field 'browser' doesn't contain a valid alias configuration
                  /Users/ericswanson/forks/examples-carsten/motoko/minimal-counter-dapp/src/index.wasm doesn't exist

webpack 5.24.4 compiled with 1 error and 1 warning in 145 ms

Stderr:
```

> $ dfx deploy

Reviewer: This fails, in part because the project needs `webpack.config.js`.  I recommend getting up-to-date versions of these files from a project created with `dfx new`, and copying them into each of these examples:
- webpack.config.js
- package.json

Author: Done
